At the time I first realized I might be fictional, my weekdays were spent at a publicly funded institution on the north side of Indianapolis called White River High School, where I was required to eat lunch at a particular time — between 12:37 p.m. and 1:14 p.m. — by forces so much larger than myself that I couldn’t even begin to identify them. If those forces had given me a different lunch period, or if the tablemates who helped author my fate had chosen a different topic of conversation that September day, I would’ve met a different end — or at least a different middle. But I was beginning to learn that your life is a story told about you, not one that you tell.

Of course, you pretend to be the author. You have to. You think, I now choose to go to lunch, when that monotone beep rings from on high at 12:37. But really, the bell decides. You think you’re the painter, but you’re the canvas.

ADVERTISEMENT

I was beginning to learn that your life is a story told about you, not one that you tell.
Hundreds of voices were shouting over one another in the cafeteria, so that the conversation became mere sound, the rushing of a river over rocks. And as I sat beneath fluorescent cylinders spewing aggressively artificial light, I thought about how we all believed ourselves to be the hero of some personal epic, when in fact we were basically identical organisms colonizing a vast and windowless room that smelled of Lysol and lard.

I was eating a peanut butter and honey sandwich and drinking a Dr Pepper. To be honest, I find the whole process of masticating plants and animals and then shoving them down my esophagus kind of disgusting, so I was trying not to think about the fact that I was eating, which is a form of thinking about it.

Across the table from me, Mychal Turner was scribbling in a yellow-paper notebook. Our lunch table was like a long-running play on Broadway: The cast changed over the years, but the roles never did. Mychal was The Artsy One. He was talking with Daisy Ramirez, who’d played the role of my Best and Most Fearless Friend since elementary school, but I couldn’t follow their conversation over the noise of all the others.

What was my part in this play? The Sidekick. I was Daisy’s Friend, or Ms. Holmes’s Daughter. I was somebody’s something.

I felt my stomach begin to work on the sandwich, and even over everybody’s talking, I could hear it digesting, all the bacteria chewing the slime of peanut butter — the students inside of me eating at my internal cafeteria. A shiver convulsed through me.

“Didn’t you go to camp with him?” Daisy asked me.

“With who?”

“Davis Pickett,” she said.

“Yeah,” I said. “Why?”

“Aren’t you listening?” Daisy asked. I am listening, I thought, to the cacophony of my digestive tract. Of course I’d long known that I was playing host to a massive collection of parasitic organisms, but I didn’t much like being reminded of it. By cell count, humans are approximately 50 percent microbial, meaning that about half of the cells that make you up are not yours at all. There are something like a thousand times more microbes living in my particular biome than there are human beings on Earth, and it often seems like I can feel them living and breeding and dying in and on me. I wiped my sweaty palms on my jeans and tried to control my breathing. Admittedly, I have some anxiety problems, but I would argue it isn’t irrational to be concerned about the fact that you are a skin-encased bacterial colony.

Mychal said, “His dad was about to be arrested for bribery or something, but the night before the raid he disappeared. There’s a $100,000 reward out for him.”

“And you know his kid,” Daisy said.

“Knew him,” I answered.

What was my part in this play? The Sidekick. I was Daisy’s Friend, or Ms. Holmes’s Daughter. I was somebody’s something.
I watched Daisy attack her school-provided rectangular pizza and green beans with a fork. She kept glancing up at me, her eyes widening as if to say, Well? I could tell she wanted me to ask her about something, but I couldn’t tell what, because my stomach wouldn’t shut up, which was forcing me deep inside a worry that I’d somehow contracted a parasitic infection.

I could half hear Mychal telling Daisy about his new art project, in which he was using Photoshop to average the faces of 100 people named Mychal, and the average of their faces would be this new, 101st Mychal, which was an interesting idea, and I wanted to listen, but the cafeteria was so loud, and I couldn’t stop wondering whether there was something wrong with the microbial balance of power inside me.

Excessive abdominal noise is an uncommon, but not unprecedented, presenting symptom of infection with the bacteria Clostridium difficile, which can be fatal. I pulled out my phone and searched “human microbiome” to reread Wikipedia’s introduction to the trillions of microorganisms currently inside me. I clicked over to the article about C. diff, scrolling to the part about how most C. diff infections occur in hospitals. I scrolled down farther to a list of symptoms, none of which I had, except for the excessive abdominal noises, although I knew from previous searches that the Cleveland Clinic had reported the case of one person who’d died of C. diff after presenting at the hospital with only abdominal pain and fever. I reminded myself that I didn’t have a fever, and my self replied: You don’t have a fever YET.

At the cafeteria, where a shrinking slice of my consciousness still resided, Daisy was telling Mychal that his averaging project shouldn’t be about people named Mychal but about imprisoned men who’d later been exonerated. “It’ll be easier, anyway,” she said, “because they all have mugshots taken from the same angle, and then it’s not just about names but about race and class and mass incarceration,” and Mychal was like, “You’re a genius, Daisy,” and she said, “You sound surprised,” and meanwhile I was thinking that if half the cells inside of you are not you, doesn’t that challenge the whole notion of me as a singular pronoun, let alone as the author of my fate? And I fell pretty far down that recursive wormhole until it transported me completely out of the White River High School cafeteria into some nonsensorial place only properly crazy people get to visit.

Ever since I was little, I’ve pressed my right thumbnail into the finger pad of my middle finger, and so now there’s this weird callus over my fingerprint. After so many years of doing this, I can open up a crack in the skin really easily, so I cover it up with a Band-Aid to try to prevent infection. But sometimes I get worried that there already is an infection, and so I need to drain it, and the only way to do that is to reopen the wound and press out any blood that will come. Once I start thinking about splitting the skin apart, I literally cannot not do it. I apologize for the double negative, but it’s a real double negative of a situation, a bind from which negating the negation is truly the only escape. So anyway, I started to want to feel my thumbnail biting into the skin of my finger pad, and I knew that resistance was more or less futile, so beneath the cafeteria table, I slipped the Band-Aid off my finger and dug my thumbnail into the callused skin until I felt the crack open.

“Holmesy,” Daisy said. I looked up at her. “We’re almost through lunch and you haven’t even mentioned my hair.” She shook out her hair, with so-red-they-were-pink highlights. Right. She’d dyed her hair.

I swum up out of the depths and said, “It’s bold.”

“I know, right? It says, ‘Ladies and gentlemen and also people who do not identify as ladies or gentlemen, Daisy Ramirez won’t break her promises, but she will break your heart.” Daisy’s self-proclaimed life motto was “Break Hearts, Not Promises.” She kept threatening to get it tattooed on her ankle when she turned 18. Daisy turned back to Mychal, and I to my thoughts. The stomach grumbling had grown, if anything, louder. I felt like I might vomit. For someone who actively dislikes bodily fluids, I throw up quite a lot.

“Holmesy, you okay?” Daisy asked. I nodded. Sometimes I wondered why she liked me, or at least tolerated me. Why any of them did. Even I found myself annoying.

The thing about a spiral is, if you follow it inward, it never actually ends. It just keeps tightening, infinitely.
I could feel sweat sprouting from my forehead, and once I begin to sweat, it’s impossible to stop. I’ll keep sweating for hours, and not just my face or my armpits. My neck sweats. My boobs sweat. My calves sweat. Maybe I did have a fever.

Beneath the table, I slid the old Band-Aid into my pocket and, without looking, pulled out a new one, unwrapped it, and then glanced down to apply it to my finger. All the while, I was breathing in through my nose and out through my mouth, in the manner advised by Dr. Karen Singh, exhaling at a pace “that would make a candle flicker but not go out. Imagine that candle, Aza, flickering from your breath but still there, always there.” So I tried that, but the thought spiral kept tightening anyway. I could hear Dr. Singh saying I shouldn’t get out my phone, that I mustn’t look up the same questions over and over, but I got it out anyway, and reread the “Human Microbiota” Wikipedia article.

The thing about a spiral is, if you follow it inward, it never actually ends. It just keeps tightening, infinitely.

I sealed the Ziploc bag around the last quarter of my sandwich, got up, and tossed it into an overfilled trash can. I heard a voice from behind me. “How concerned should I be that you haven’t said more than two words in a row all day?”

“Thought spiral,” I mumbled in reply. Daisy had known me since we were 6, long enough to get it.

“I figured. Sorry, man. Let’s hang out today.”

This girl Molly walked up to us, smiling, and said, “Uh, Daisy, just FYI, your Kool-Aid dye job is staining your shirt.”

Daisy looked down at her shoulders, and indeed, her striped top had turned pink in spots. She flinched for a second, then straightened her spine. “Yeah, it’s part of the look, Molly. Stained shirts are huge in Paris right now.” She turned away from Molly and said, “Right, so we’ll go to your house and watch Star Wars: Rebels.” Daisy was really into Star Wars — and not just the movies, but also the books and the animated shows and the kids’ show where they’re all made out of Legos. Like, she wrote fan fiction about Chewbacca’s love life. “And we will improve your mood until you are able to say three or even four words in a row; sound good?”

“Sounds good.”

“And then you can take me to work. Sorry, but I need a ride.”

Anybody can look at you. It’s quite rare to find someone who sees the same world you see.
“Okay.” I wanted to say more, but the thoughts kept coming, unbidden and unwanted. If I’d been the author, I would’ve stopped thinking about my microbiome. I would’ve told Daisy how much I liked her idea for Mychal’s art project, and I would’ve told her that I did remember Davis Pickett, that I remembered being 11 and carrying a vague but constant fear. I would’ve told her that I remembered once at camp lying next to Davis on the edge of a dock, our legs dangling over, our backs against the rough-hewn planks of wood, staring together up at a cloudless summer sky. I would’ve told her that Davis
and I never talked much, or even looked at each other, but it didn’t matter, because we were looking at the same sky together, which is maybe more intimate than eye contact anyway. Anybody can look at you. It’s quite rare to find someone who sees the same world you see.


Marta Montiero for BuzzFeed News
ADVERTISEMENT

The fear had mostly sweated out of me, but as I walked from the cafeteria to history class, I couldn’t stop myself from taking out my phone and rereading the horror story that is the “Human Microbiota” Wikipedia article. I was reading and walking when I heard my mother shout at me through her open classroom door. She was seated behind her metal desk, leaning over a book. Mom was a math teacher, but reading was her great love.

“No phones in the hallway, Aza!” I put my phone away and went into her classroom. There were four minutes remaining in my lunch period, which was the perfect length for a Mom conversation. She looked up and must’ve seen something in my eyes. “You okay?”

“Yeah,” I said.

“You’re not anxious?” she asked. At some point, Dr. Singh had told Mom not to ask if I was feeling anxious, so she’d stopped phrasing it as a direct question.

“I’m fine.”

“You’ve been taking your meds,” she said. Again, not a direct question.

“Yeah,” I said, which was broadly true. I’d had a bit of a crack-up my freshman year, after which I was prescribed a circular white pill to be taken once daily. I took it, on average, maybe thrice weekly.

“You look...” Sweaty, is what I knew she meant.

“Who decides when the bells ring?” I asked. “Like, the school bells?”

“You know what, I have no idea. I suppose that’s decided by someone on the superintendent’s staff.”

“Like, why are lunch periods 37 minutes long instead of 50? Or 22? Or whatever?”

“Your brain seems like a very intense place,” Mom answered.

“It’s just weird, how this is decided by someone I don’t know and then I have to live by it. Like, I live on someone else’s schedule. And I’ve never even met them.”

ADVERTISEMENT

“Yes, well, in that respect and many others, American high schools do rather resemble prisons.”

My eyes widened. “Oh my God, Mom, you’re so right. The metal detectors. The cinder-block walls.”

“They’re both overcrowded and underfunded,” Mom said. “And both have bells that ring to tell you when to move.”

“And you don’t get to choose when you eat lunch,” I said. “And prisons have power-thirsty, corrupt guards, just like schools have teachers.”

She shot me a look, but then started laughing. “You headed straight home after school?”

“Yeah, then I gotta take Daisy to work.”

Mom nodded. “Sometimes I miss you being a little kid, but then I remember Chuck E. Cheese.”

“She’s just trying to save money for college.”

Daisy was the only person I'd trusted with a key to Harold. 
My mom glanced back down at her book. “You know, if we lived in Europe, college wouldn’t cost much.” I braced myself for Mom’s cost-of-college rant. “There are free universities in Brazil. Most of Europe. China. But here they want to charge you $25,000 a year, for in-state tuition. I just finished paying off my loans a few years ago, and soon we’ll have to take out ones for you.”

“I’m only a junior. I’ve got plenty of time to win the lottery. And if that doesn’t work out, I’ll just pay for school by selling meth.”

She smiled wanly. Mom really worried about paying for me to go to school. “You sure you’re okay?” she asked.

I nodded as the bell sounded from on high, sending me to history.

ADVERTISEMENT

By the time I made it to my car after school, Daisy was already in the passenger seat. She’d changed out of the stained shirt she’d been wearing into her red Chuck E. Cheese polo, and was sitting with her backpack in her lap, drinking a container of school milk. Daisy was the only person I’d trusted with a key to Harold. Mom didn’t even have her own Harold key, but Daisy did.

“Please do not drink nonclear liquids in Harold,” I told her.

“Milk is a clear liquid,” she said.

“Lies,” I answered, and before we set off, I drove Harold over to the front entrance and waited while Daisy threw away her milk.

Maybe you’ve been in love. I mean real love, the kind my grandmother used to describe by quoting the Apostle Paul’s First Letter to the Corinthians, the love that is kind and patient, that does not envy or boast, that beareth all things and believeth all things and endureth all things. I don’t like to throw the L-word around; it’s too good and rare a feeling to cheapen with overuse. You can live a good life without ever knowing real love, of the Corinthians variety, but I was fortunate to have found it with Harold.

He was a 16-year-old Toyota Corolla with a paint color called Mystic Teal Mica and an engine that clanked in a steady rhythm like the beating of his immaculate metallic heart. Harold had been my dad’s car — in fact, Dad had named him Harold. Mom never sold him, so he stayed in the garage for eight years, until my 16th birthday.

Getting Harold’s engine running after so long took all of the $400 dollars I’d saved over the course of my life — allowances, change ferreted away when Mom sent me down the street to buy something at the Circle K, summer work at Subway, Christmas gifts from my grandparents — so, in a way, Harold was the culmination of my whole being, at least financially speaking. And I loved him. I dreamed about him quite a lot. He had an exceptionally spacious trunk, a custom-installed, huge white steering wheel, and a backseat bench clad in pebble-beige leather. He accelerated with the gentle serenity of the Buddhist Zen master who knows nothing really needs to be done quickly, and his brakes whined like metal machine music, and I loved him.

Harold's imperfect audio system happened to be the last note in the melody of coincidences that changed my life.
However, Harold did not have Bluetooth connectivity, or for that matter a CD player, meaning that while in Harold’s company, one had three choices: 1. Drive in silence; 2. Listen to the radio; or 3. Listen to side B of my dad’s cassette of Missy Elliott’s excellent album So Addictive, which — because it would not eject from the cassette player — I’d already heard hundreds of times in my life.

And in the end, Harold’s imperfect audio system happened to be the last note in the melody of coincidences that changed my life.

Daisy and I were scanning stations in search of a song by a particular brilliant and underappreciated boy band when we landed upon a news story. “—Indianapolis-based -Pickett Engineering, a construction firm employing more than 10,000 people worldwide, today—” I moved my hand toward the scan button, but Daisy pushed it away.

“This is what I was telling you about!” she said as the radio continued, “—one-hundred-thousand-dollar reward for information leading to the whereabouts of company CEO Russell Pickett. Pickett, who disappeared the night before a police raid on his home related to a fraud and bribery investigation, was last seen at his riverside compound on September 8. Anyone with information regarding his whereabouts is encouraged to call the Indianapolis Police Department.”

“A hundred thousand dollars,” Daisy said. “And you know his kid.”

“Knew,” I said. For two summers, after fifth and sixth grades, Davis and I had gone to Sad Camp together, which is what we’d called Camp Spero, this place down in Brown County for kids with dead parents.

Aside from hanging out together at Sad Camp, Davis and I would also sometimes see each other during the school year, because he lived just down the river from me, but on the opposite bank. Mom and I lived on the side that sometimes flooded. The Picketts lived on the side with the stone-gabled walls that forced the rising water in our direction.

“He probably wouldn’t even remember me.”

“Everyone remembers you, Holmesy,” she said.

“That’s not—”

“It’s not a value judgment. I’m not saying you’re good or generous or kind or whatever. I’m just saying you’re memorable.”

“I haven’t seen him in years,” I said. But of course you don’t forget playdates at a mansion that contains a golf course, a pool with an island, and five waterslides. Davis was the closest thing to a proper celebrity I’d ever encountered.

“I’m fixing Skee-Ball machines for $8.40 an hour and there’s a hundred grand waiting for us.”
“A hundred thousand dollars,” Daisy said again. We pulled onto I-465, the beltway that circumscribes Indianapolis. “I’m fixing Skee-Ball machines for $8.40 an hour and there’s a hundred grand waiting for us.”

“I wouldn’t say waiting for us. Anyway, I have to read about the effects of smallpox on indigenous populations tonight, so I can’t really solve The Case of the Fugitive Billionaire.” I eased Harold up to highway speed. I never drove him faster than the speed limit. I loved him too much.

“Well, you know him better than I do, so to quote the infallible boys in the world’s greatest pop group, ‘You’re the One,’” which was this super-cheesy song I was way too old to love, but loved nonetheless.

“I want to disagree with you, but that is such a great song.”

“You’re. The. One. ‘You’re the one that I choose. The one I’ll never lose. You’re my forever. My stars. My sky. My air. It’s you.’”

We laughed, and I changed the radio station and thought it was over, but then Daisy started reading me an Indianapolis Star story from her phone. “ ‘Russell Pickett, the controversial CEO and founder of Pickett Engineering, wasn’t home when a search warrant was served by the Indianapolis police Friday morning, and he hasn’t been home since. Pickett’s lawyer, Simon Morris, says he has no information about Pickett’s whereabouts, and in a press conference today, Detective Dwight Allen said that no activity on Pickett’s credit cards or bank accounts has been noted since the evening before the raid.’ Blah-blah-blah... ‘Allen also asserted that aside from a camera at the front gate, there were no surveillance cameras on the property. A copy of a police report obtained by the Star says that Pickett was last seen Thursday evening by his sons, Davis and Noah.’ Blah-blah-blah... ‘estate just north of 38th Street, lots of lawsuits, supports the zoo,’ blah-blah-blah... ‘call the police if you know anything,’ blah-blah-blah. Wait, how are there no security cameras? What kind of billionaire doesn’t have security cameras?”

“The kind who doesn’t want his shady business recorded,” I said. As we drove, I kept turning the story over in my head. I knew some edge of it was jagged, but I couldn’t figure out which one, until I snagged a memory of eerie green coyotes with white eyes. “Wait, there was a camera. Not a security one, but Davis and his brother had a motion-capture camera in the woods by the river. It had, like, night vision, and it would snap a picture whenever something walked past — deer or coyotes or whatever.”

“Holmesy,” she said. “We have a lead.”

“And because of the camera at the front gate, he couldn’t have just driven off,” I said. “So either he climbs over his own wall, or else he walks through the woods down to the river and leaves from there, right?”

“Yes...”

“So he could’ve tripped that camera. I mean, it’s been a few years since I was there; maybe it’s gone.”

“And maybe it’s not!” Daisy said.

“Yeah. Maybe it’s not.”

“Exit here,” she said suddenly, and I did. I knew it was the wrong exit, but I took it anyway, and without Daisy even telling me to, I got in the right lane to drive back into the city, toward my house. Toward Davis’s house.

Daisy took out her phone and raised it to her ear. “Hey, Eric. It’s Daisy. Listen, I’m really sorry, but I’ve got the stomach flu. Could be norovirus.”

“...”

“Yeah, no problem. Sorry again.” She hung up, put her phone in her bag, and said, “If you even imply diarrhea, they tell you to stay home because they’re so scared of outbreaks. Right, okay, we’re doing this. You still got that canoe?” ●


Dutton Books for Young Readers
John Green is the award-winning, #1 bestselling author of Looking for Alaska, An Abundance of Katherines, Paper Towns, Will Grayson, Will Grayson (with David Levithan), and The Fault in Our Stars. His many accolades include the Printz Medal, a Printz Honor, and the Edgar Award. John has twice been a finalist for the LA Times Book Prize and was selected by TIME magazine as one of the 100 Most Influential People in the World. With his brother, Hank, John is one half of the Vlogbrothers and co-created the online educational series CrashCourse. You can join the millions who follow him on Twitter @johngreen and Instagram @johngreenwritesbooks or visit him online at johngreenbooks.com. John lives with his family in Indianapolis, Indiana.

To learn more about Turtles All the Way Down, click here. (If you're in the UK, click here.)

You can also watch a video of John Green reading the first chapter of the book here.

hildren’s and YA novels bear a rare distinction among all published books: They come with a ticking clock of societally acceptable reading. If you’re nineteen or ninety, you can read whatever you want, and everyone will admire you for choosing a book over Twitter. But if you’re eight, some adult will have an opinion on whether you should still be reading picture books, or if that chapter book is too long for you. If you’re eleven, another adult might weigh in on whether the content of the novel you’re reading is morally appropriate, whether you asked their opinion or not. Once you’re fifteen, critics can worry that the “dark” themes of your favorite YA novel are infecting your brain, encouraging you toward anti-social behavior or self-harm. At the moment you blow out eighteen candles, snobs will announce you shouldn’t read YA anymore, because that contributes to the infantilization of America. (“But I just wanted to finish the Chaos Walking trilogy . . .” you say.)

What underlies all of these opinions is a societal sense of a right age to read certain books, based on the reader’s reading ability, the perceived age level of the book in question, and what we want children or teenagers to do, feel, think, know, or not know. In many of these cases, the naysayers are just patronizing buttinskis: If you meet someone who thinks YA fiction is less intelligent than adult fiction, for instance, please smack them down with The Astonishing Life of Octavian Nothing, Traitor to the Nation by M. T. Anderson. (Literally, if you choose, though be careful: It’s a heavy book.)

But indeed, some novels are more appropriate than others for young people at various ages, mostly because kids’ lives and perspectives can change so drastically with every turn of the calendar. While grown-ups can work the same job with the same people doing the same tasks for a decade or more, a child’s world can explode and remake itself every year, as he graduates to a new grade with a new teacher and a new set of possible friends and enemies; acquires new siblings or responsibilities or skills; and becomes aware of more of the world, in all its beauty, possibilities, and ugliness. As a result, an effervescent nine-year-old who loves horses can be a very different person three years later, when she might skulk about on a skateboard for hours; and those two different people would require different books for their divergent interests, emotional concerns, and levels of reading proficiency.

Age Bands in Children’s and Young Adult Publishing

So how do we define these age bands in publishing? While no one in the industry will say the following seven categories are perfect, they reflect generally agreed-upon stages of child development, literary ability, and social approval. I am borrowing the word counts from agent Jennifer Laughran’s excellent “Wordcount Dracula” post at literaticat.blogspot.com.

Board books: Ages 0–3; 0–100 words. These books feature thick cardboard pages—the better to be drooled or chewed on—and often include special visual or textural elements to attract and hold little ones’ interest.
Picture books: Ages 3–8; 0–1,300 words, with a sweet spot of 300–550 words. Most picture books are written to be read by adults to children, so they may use language that falls outside the vocabulary of the children themselves. The illustrations tell the story in concert with the words, and profoundly shape the emotional experience of the text.
Early or easy readers: Ages 4–7; 100–2,500 words, depending upon the reading level. These are carefully written and designed to promote children’s reading skills and confidence, usually featuring large text with a prescribed number of words or lines per page. The color illustrations will often be deliberately redundant with the story, so a young reader who is struggling with the words “purple scarf” might see that bright violet neckwear in the picture and take a cue from it. Because children read through easy readers quickly and primarily to gain skills, they are usually published as paperbacks, with occasional hardcover editions for libraries.
Chapter books: Ages 7–10; 4,000–13,000 words, with a sweet spot of 6,000–10,000 words. These retain the larger text size and illustrated format of easy readers, but the pictures will be less frequent—a few per chapter, usually in black-and-white. Chapter books are also often published in series, which allow children to have the familiarity of reading about beloved characters while enjoying new adventures for them each time.
Middle-grade novels: Ages 8–12; for realistic novels, 25,000–60,000 words (sweet spot: 30,000–45,000); for fantasy, 35,000–75,000 words (sweet spot: 45,000–65,000).
Young adult novels: Ages 13–18; for realistic novels, 35,000–75,000 words (sweet spot: 45,000–70,000); for fantasy, 50,000–150,000 words (sweet spot: 65,000–85,000). Editors and agents definitely side-eye anything over 100,000 words in any category, so if your manuscript is that long, the story needs to justify its length.
New adult novels: Ages 18–30, same word count as YA. These books have the emotional intensity of young adult novels but are focused on the experiences of college or early adulthood, often including the additional “content” (as defined below) that comes with those experiences. Some YA editors occasionally handle new adult, but the genre is more often published by an adult house.
The chapter book, middle-grade, and young adult categories are the object of our investigations in this book. These are my basic expectations for what these novels will do:

The book will be centrally interested in the life, experience, and growth of its young protagonist. This may sound like an obvious statement, but many adult novels use young protagonists as a lens on the corruption or danger or wideness of the world, and I often feel those books aren’t interested in the protagonist so much as the “innocent” contrast he provides.
It will have a fully developed story, with a beginning, middle, and end, in which most of the action is dramatized on the page for us, and those events have shape and meaning. (Nihilism can be a hard sell in children’s and young adult publishing.)
The protagonist will contribute to the action, consistently doing things or making choices that move the narrative forward.
The novel will be narrated with relative immediacy to the protagonist’s youthful perspective, and not with the distance of, say, an adult looking back at his preteen years.
In more literary novels, the protagonist will be different at the end of the novel than he was at the beginning, and usually for the better, as he will have gained some new understanding, wisdom, connections, or security within himself or the world. Richard Peck offers the excellent dictum that a YA novel ends “not with happily ever after, but at a new beginning, with the sense of a lot of life yet to be lived”; and in a children’s or YA novel, I want to see the events of the book prepare the protagonist for that future.
Finally, the book should give pleasure to its young readers in some way—by making them laugh or cry, or involving them in an adventure, or introducing them to new fictional friends, kids whose lives and feelings resonate with or expand their own. Adults will read a book for the prestige of its literary merit, or solely for the beauty of the prose; but most child and teen readers want a good story, with characters and a situation that will catch their imaginations and prove the book is worth their time.
Once a book satisfies all of those considerations, it does have to be assigned an age category, because it has to be shelved in and sold from a specific section in a bookstore, and we publishers want to place it in the section where it will have the most appeal to readers. When we’re making a determination about whether a book is YA or middle-grade (which includes chapter books), we look at five major factors that are all deeply interconnected:

The Physical Age of the Protagonist. It is a publishing rule of thumb—so ingrained that it’s practically a rule of the whole hand—that children and teenagers want to read about people their own age or older, and they will not read about people younger than they are. (The truth of this rule varies wildly with individual readers, of course, but it gives us publishers a useful basic guideline.) As a result, the first thing we look to in setting an age category for a book is the age of the protagonist: If he is twelve or younger, the book belongs in middle-grade; thirteen or older, it’s young adult. (I should note that these are the standards set by bookselling retailers, as the American Library Association offers slightly different guidelines for its age-based awards.) Additionally, if the protagonist is older than eighteen or in college, conventional wisdom holds that the novel should be adult fiction, though YA publishers sometimes push this bromide with new adult material.

Writers learning these guidelines often ask questions like, “What if I’m writing a five-book series where the first book features the protagonist at ten, but she ages two years in each novel, so the series will start as middle-grade but end as new adult? J. K. Rowling crossed age categories like this; why can’t I?” Well, if the first book in your series is as delightful and sells as well as Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone, then yes, you can. Until that happens, you might want to reconsider your series plans, as publishers and retailers will want to be able to group all the books together in one section, and the section changes could create difficulty in our selling the series as a whole.

The Emotional Age of the Protagonist. You might know a ten-year-old girl with the attitude and wardrobe of a fifteen-year-old, or a fourteen-year-old boy who secretly still loves to play Legos. (No judgment, in either case!) If a character’s physical age is determined by her birth certificate, her emotional age is how old she feels and acts mentally and emotionally—the age to which her interests and emotions are cued.

What distinguishes the emotional ages of a middle-grader versus those of a young adult? Well, just about everyone who works in children’s and YA literature will offer you a different formula, though they all run along the same lines. Novelist Laura Ruby observed once, “Middle grade is about ability; YA is about identity”; that is, in middle-grade, a character gains skills, knowledge, or perspective, while in YA, she refines what she has learned into a particular worldview and chooses a path of action for the future. The agent and writer Michael Stearns says that in YA, “how a character feels about what is happening is as important as what is happening,” while middle-grade tends to be more outwardly focused.

When I’m thinking about the middle-grade/YA distinction for novels I edit, it often comes down to the characters’ relationship to the idea of home. Middle-grade protagonists are acquiring some independence, certainly, but they still need the anchor that “home” and all it represents provides. When they participate in a grand adventure, it usually ends with the promise of a return home to a safe space, the status quo. If their family or home situation is a bad one, they’ll want to find a new home, as they’re looking for security, not seeking to strike out on their own. In general, if a novel focuses strongly on its protagonist’s relationship to his family, school, or animals, or if the protagonist is an animal, then my first instinct will be that it belongs in middle-grade.

Meanwhile, YA protagonists are interested in the world beyond home: friends, romance and sex, independence, travel, the future. Most times the protagonist’s driving ambition or desire will lie in something that will help them establish an independent identity from their home, and the action will take place outside the domestic sphere. If family or home do come into the story, it’s usually either as an obstacle (parents or circumstances that keep the protagonist from achieving her dreams), or, interestingly, as stakes, where she has to fight to protect her home or family from threats in the wider world. Think about your protagonist’s relationship with home to help determine her emotional age.

The “Content” of the Book. I’m using the word “content” here as a catchall term for language or subjects that American adults often wish to keep young people away from: swear words, sex, drug use, and violence and the effects of violence. Just as certain words, images, or subjects will earn a movie a PG-13 or R rating, the appearance of those words, images, or subjects in a book for young readers can push its classification from middle-grade to YA. (You can write pretty much anything in YA besides erotica.) This troublesome content and the politics of this content have been widely debated within the industry, as they are in American culture as a whole. Writers who choose to include such content in their books should be aware that it might limit the book’s audience, as some adult gatekeepers (and some young readers themselves) don’t want kids exposed to what they regard as corruptive influences.

From a publishing perspective, editors want content at every level to be justified by the reality of the characters and story line, and to be in tune with the ethos of the overall book. (Put another way, if you’re adding content just to seem cool or edgy, it shows.) If it is necessary for the story line, theme, or art of your book, then you absolutely should include that edgier content. Often you can’t write the truth of a place or a life without swearing, sex, drugs, or violence. Indeed, in both YA novels and many people’s adolescences, coming of age is often defined by first encounters with those things. Don’t shy away from such material, but don’t be salacious about it, either. Just treat it with the same matter-of-factness you’d apply to any other element of the character’s life, and write it true.

The Subject Matter of the Book. Some novels presume a level of pre-existing knowledge about or interest in their subject matter. Romances that go beyond first kisses are almost always YA, in keeping with teenagers’ awakening sexuality. A novel about the Civil War could work just fine for middle-grade, as many young readers first hear about it in their introductory American history classes; but one about a soldier in Alexander the Great’s army might be better suited for YA, after readers have studied world history. A book that deals with an older sister’s teen pregnancy could have a ten-year-old protagonist and no mature content on the page, but it might still be better served as a YA novel if it gets into abortion and the politics surrounding it, as most middle-graders have probably not encountered the topic. If you’re trying to determine what academic subjects a young reader might know or not know, you can look at curriculum guidelines to see when certain eras of history or other subjects are taught in schools.

The Prose Style and Reading Level. Compare these two passages:

Arrietty wandered through the open door into the sitting room. Ah, the fire had been lighted and the room looked bright and cozy. Homily was proud of her sitting room: the walls had been papered with scraps of old letters out of waste-paper baskets, and Homily had arranged the handwriting sideways in vertical stripes which ran from floor to ceiling. On the walls, repeated in various colours, hung several portraits of Queen Victoria as a girl: these were postage stamps, borrowed by Pod some years ago from the stamp box on the desk in the morning room.

We’re late, near the last: Hide is already shuffling back-forth back-forth on his little patch of ground, and Heather’s fingers are tapping ’gainst the arm of her wheelchair, the one that used to belong to Reynard before he died and we put him in the ground. Seed’s hand’s caught her other, fingers tangled together, talking broad-smile low to Jiélì’s ma Kimmie, while the little girl squirms and fidgets and makes her singing noises in her mama’s arms. I count heads: near the full forty-three people who shelter in Safe. Forty-three Tales in the back of my head; forty-three offerings to make a Tale of tonight.

The first passage is from a classic English middle-grade novel called The Borrowers by Mary Norton; the second is from a contemporary magical-realist YA novel called Above by Leah Bobet (which I edited). While the two books are both about communities of people who live hidden away, the writing alone signals their different audiences and intentions. The Borrowers offers up straightforward sentences—long, but not difficult to detangle—with an emphasis on explanation and description, so a young reader can easily envision this charming room and feel oriented in the comic action that will take place there. Above, on the other hand, is written in a dense, evocative, world-specific dialect that concentrates on the details of the scene more than the overall setting. It also drops a thicket of proper nouns and relationships for the reader to figure out and keep track of—a strategy that is important long-term for the book’s themes of community, diversity, and inclusivity. The mere fact that Above involves those themes means it needs a reader sophisticated enough to appreciate their complex treatment here, as well as one with a high degree of reading ability and the patience to decipher the language and find pleasure in it. All of that points to YA.

Obviously these two examples come from extreme ends of the literary spectrum, and there are plenty of YA novels with straightforward declarative sentences, and plenty of middle-grade books with an extraordinary level of literary sophistication. Perhaps the true distinguishing factor here is intensity: YA often burns white-hot emotionally, dramatically, even linguistically, while middle-grade holds itself at more of a comforting simmer.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

EXERCISE

If you’re concerned about the right age category for your work-in-progress (WIP), let’s see how these principles apply to your book. Answer the following questions:

How old is your protagonist at the beginning of the book? If twelve or younger, write “MG”; thirteen or older, “YA.”
 What are his or her emotional concerns? List them all. Do they feel more like the problems of a middle-grader or a YA reader, according to the standards set out above? Write “MG” or “YA” appropriately.
Is there any mature content, beyond the occasional punch or minor swear word? If yes, write “YA” as a default.
How much preexisting knowledge does the subject matter require? This might have to be a gut-level call. Again, write “MG” or “YA.”
And the prose style? Are there many complex sentences and difficult words? Is there a sophistication in the prose that might leave a younger reader behind? Again, choose “MG” or “YA.”
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If all of your answers line up in the same age band, congratulations! Your work here is done. If your answers split between “MG” and “YA,” you should just be aware that such books can be harder for agents and publishers to sell, as any disjunction within those categories means the book might struggle to find its right audience. If you can pick a category, stick to it, and revise the manuscript accordingly, it will go easier for you. Maybe your fourteen-year-old protagonist could actually be twelve, or vice versa. If every plot element points toward YA, but your prose is more middle-grade, perhaps you could find ways to increase the temperature and complexity of your writing. (Or you may want to start a new project that is appropriate for middle-grade; it can be very hard to change your voice.)

If you truly can’t decide on an age band, here are some additional questions that might point you toward a final answer:

Which kind of book did you think you were writing? What aspects of it indicated that answer to you?

When you envision yourself giving the book to a young reader, or visiting schools or doing signings, how old are the kids you imagine?

How old do you feel you are, emotionally? Do you still relish the drama and crises of adolescence, or seek out safety foremost? What was your favorite age as a child? How old are your favorite young people to talk to now?

Again: The more you can harmonize all of these elements within the story you want to tell, the more easily the publishing journey will go for you and your book.

That morning, Jim Sams, clever but by no means profound, woke from uneasy dreams to find himself transformed into a gigantic creature. For a good while he remained on his back (not his favourite posture) and regarded his distant feet, his paucity of limbs, with consternation. A mere four, of course, and quite unmovable. His own little brown legs, for which he was already feeling some nostalgia, would have been waving merrily in the air, however hopelessly. He lay still, determined not to panic. An organ, a slab of slippery meat, lay squat and wet in his mouth – revolting, especially when it moved of its own accord to explore the vast cavern of his mouth and, he noted with muted alarm, slide across an immensity of teeth. He stared along the length of his body. His colouring, from shoulders to ankles, was a pale blue, with darker blue piping around his neck and wrists, and white buttons in a vertical line right down his unsegmented thorax. The light breeze that blew intermittently across it, bearing a not unattractive odour of decomposing food and grain alcohol, he accepted as his breath. His vision was unhelpfully narrowed – oh for a compound eye – and everything he saw was oppressively colourful. He was beginning to understand that by a grotesque reversal his vulnerable flesh now lay outside his skeleton, which was therefore wholly invisible to him. What a comfort it would have been to catch a glimpse of that homely nacreous brown.

Advertisement
All this was worrying enough, but as he came more fully awake he remembered that he was on an important, solitary mission, though for the moment he could not recall what it was. I’m going to be late, he thought, as he attempted to lift from the pillow a head that must have weighed as much as five kilos. This is so unfair, he told himself. I don’t deserve this. His fragmentary dreams had been deep and wild, haunted by raucous, echoing voices in constant dissent. Only now, as this head slumped back, did he begin to see through to the far side of sleep and bring to mind a mosaic of memories, impressions and intentions that scattered as he tried to hold them down.

Yes, he had left the pleasantly decaying Palace of Westminster without even a farewell. That was how it had to be. Secrecy was all. He had known that without being told. But when exactly had he set out? Certainly it was after dark. Last night? The night before? He must have left by the underground car park. He would have passed the polished boots of the policeman at the entrance. Now he remembered. Keeping to the gutter, he had hurried along until he had reached the edge of the terrifying crossing in Parliament Square. In front of a line of idling vehicles impatient to pestle him into the tarmac, he made a dash for the gutter on the far side. After which, it seemed a week passed before he crossed another terrifying road to reach the correct side of Whitehall. Then what? He had sprinted, surely, for many yards and then stopped. Why? It was coming back to him now. Breathing heavily through every tube in his body, he had rested near a wholesome drain to snack on a discarded slice of pizza. He couldn’t eat it all, but he did his best. By good luck it was a margherita. His second favourite. No olives. Not on that portion.

Quick guide
Ian McEwan on The Cockroach
Show
Advertisement
His unmanageable head, he discovered, could rotate through 180 degrees with little effort. He turned it now to one side. It was a small attic bedroom, unpleasantly lit by the morning sun, for the curtains had not been drawn. There was a telephone at his bedside, no, two telephones. His constricted gaze travelled across the carpet to settle on the skirting board and the narrow gap along its lower edge. I might have squeezed under there out of the morning light, he thought sadly. I could have been happy. Across the room there was a sofa and by it, on a low table, a cut-glass tumbler and an empty bottle of scotch. Laid out over an armchair was a suit and a laundered, folded shirt. On a larger table near the window were two box files, one sitting on top of the other, both coloured red.

He was getting the hang of moving his eyes, now that he understood the way they smoothly swivelled together without his help. Rather than letting his tongue hang out beyond his lips, where it dripped from time to time on to his chest, he found it was more comfortably housed within the oozing confines of his mouth. Horrible. But he was acquiring the knack of steering his new form. He was a quick learner. What troubled him was the need to set about his business. There were important decisions to be taken. Suddenly, a movement on the floor caught his attention. It was a little creature, in his own previous form, no doubt the displaced owner of the body he now inhabited. He watched with a degree of protective interest as the tiny thing struggled over the strands of pile carpet, towards the door. There it hesitated, its twin antennae waving uncertainly with all of a beginner’s ineptitude. Finally, it gathered its courage and stumbled under the door to begin a difficult, perilous descent. It was a long way back to the palace, and there would be much danger along the way. But if it made it without being squashed underfoot, it would find, behind the palace panelling or below the floorboards, safety and solace among millions of its siblings. He wished it well. But now he must attend to his own concerns.

 He was a tiny element in a scheme of a magnitude that no single individual could comprehend
And yet Jim did not stir. Nothing made sense, all movement was pointless until he could piece together the journey, the events, that had led him to an unfamiliar bedroom. After that chance meal he had scuttled along, barely conscious of the bustle above him, minding his own business as he hugged the shadows of the gutter, though for how long and how far was beyond recall. What he knew for certain was that he reached at last an obstacle that towered over him, a small mountain of dung, still warm and faintly steaming. Any other time, he would have rejoiced. He regarded himself as something of a connoisseur. He knew how to live well. This particular consignment he could instantly place. Who could mistake that nutty aroma, with hints of petroleum, banana skin and saddle soap. The Horse Guards! But what a mistake, to have eaten between meals. The margherita had left him with no appetite for excrement, however fresh or distinguished, nor any inclination, given his gathering exhaustion, to clamber all the way over it. He crouched in the mountain’s shadow, on the springy ground of its foothills, and considered his options. After a moment’s reflection, it was clear what he must do. He set about scaling the vertical granite wall of the kerb in order to circumvent the heap and descend on its far side.

Advertisement

Reclining now in the attic bedroom, he decided that this was the point at which he had parted company with his own free will, or the illusion of it, and had come under the influence of a greater, guiding force. Mounting the pavement, as he did, he submitted to the collective spirit. He was a tiny element in a scheme of a magnitude that no single individual could comprehend.

He heaved himself on to the top of the kerb, noting that the droppings extended a third of the way across the pavement. Then, out of nowhere, there came down upon him a sudden storm, the thunder of 10,000 feet, and chants and bells, whistles and trumpets. Yet another rowdy demonstration. So late in the evening. Loutish people making trouble when they should have been at home. Nowadays, these protests were staged almost every week. Disrupting vital services, preventing ordinary decent types from going about their lawful business. He froze on the kerb, expecting to be squashed at any moment. The soles of shoes 15 times his own length slammed the ground inches from where he cowered and made his antennae and the pavement tremble. How fortunate for him that at one point he chose to look up, entirely in the spirit of fatalism. He was prepared to die. But that was when he saw an opportunity – a gap in the procession. The next wave of protesters was 50 yards away. He saw their banners streaming, their flags bearing down, yellow stars on a blue ground. Union Jacks too. He had never scuttled so fast in his life. Breathing hard through all the trachea on his body segments, he gained the other side by a heavy iron gate seconds before they were on him again with thunderclaps of hideous tramping, and now catcalls and savage drumbeats. Seized by mortal fear and indignation, an inconvenient mix, he darted off the pavement and, to save his life, squeezed under the gate into the sanctuary and relative tranquillity of a side street where he instantly recognised the heel of a standard issue policeman’s boot. Reassuring, as ever.


Sign up for Bookmarks: discover new books in our weekly email
 Read more
Then what? He proceeded along the empty pavement, past a row of exclusive residences. Here he was surely fulfilling the plan. The collective pheromonal unconscious of his kind bestowed on him an instinctive understanding of his direction of travel. After half an hour of uneventful progress, he paused, as he was meant to do. On the far side of the street was a group of a hundred or so photographers and reporters. On his side, he was level with and close by a door, outside which stood yet another policeman. And just then, that door swung open and a woman in high heels stepped out, almost spearing him right through his ninth and tenth abdominal segments. The door remained open. Perhaps a visitor was arriving. In those few seconds Jim looked into a welcoming, softly lit hallway, with skirting boards somewhat scuffed – always a good sign. On a sudden impulse that he now knew was not his own, he ran in.

 Like many of his kind, he rather fancied himself at the dispatch box. He would be fast on his feet, even though he only had two
Advertisement

He was doing well, given his unusual circumstances, lying on this unfamiliar bed, to recall such details. It was good to know that his brain, his mind, was much as it had always been. He remained, after all, his essential self. It was the surprising presence of a cat that had caused him to run, not in the direction of the skirting boards, but towards the stairs. He climbed three and looked back. The cat, a brown and white tabby, had not seen him, but Jim considered it dangerous to descend. So began his long climb. On the first floor there were too many people walking along the landing, in and out of rooms. More prospect of being trodden to death. An hour later, when he reached the second floor, the carpets were being vigorously vacuumed. He knew of many souls who had been lost that way, sucked into dusty oblivion. No choice but to keep on climbing until – but now, suddenly, here in the attic, all his thoughts were obliterated by the harsh ringing of one of the bedside telephones. Even though he found that he could at last move one of his limbs, an arm, he did not stir. He couldn’t trust his voice. And even if he could, what would he say? I’m not who you think I am? After four rings the phone went silent.

He lay back and allowed his frantic heart to settle. He practised moving his legs. At last, they stirred. But barely an inch. He tried again with an arm, and raised it until it towered far above his head. So, back to the story. He had heaved himself up the last step to arrive breathless on the top landing. He squeezed under the nearest door into a small apartment. Usually, he would have made straight for the kitchen but instead he climbed a bedpost and, utterly depleted, crept under a pillow. He must have slept deeply for – but now, dammit, there came a tapping sound and before he could respond, the door to the bedroom was opening. A young woman in a beige trouser suit stood on the threshold and gave a brisk nod before entering.

“I tried phoning but I thought I’d better come up. Prime minister, it’s almost 7.30.”

He could think of no response.

The woman, clearly an aide of some kind, came into the room and picked up the empty bottle. Her manner was rather too familiar.

“Quite an evening, I see.”

It would not have done to remain silent for long. From his bed he aimed for an inarticulate sound, somewhere between a groan and a croak. Not bad. Higher pitched than he would have wanted, with a hint of a chirrup, but plausible enough.

The aide was gesturing towards the larger table, at the red boxes. “I don’t suppose you had a chance to, uh…”

He played it safe by making the same sound again, this time on a lower note.

Advertisement

“Perhaps after breakfast you could take a … I should remind you. It’s Wednesday. Cabinet at nine. Priorities for government and PMQs at noon.”

Illustration by Lehel Kovacs.
FacebookTwitterPinterest
 Illustration by Lehel Kovacs.
Prime Minister’s Questions. How many of those he had crouched through, listening enthralled from behind the rotten wainscoting in the company of a few thousand select acquaintances? How familiar he was with the opposition leader’s shouted questions, the brilliant non sequitur replies, the festive jeers and clever imitations of sheep. It would be a dream come true, to be primo uomo in the weekly operetta. But was he adequately prepared? No less than anyone else, surely. Not after a quick glance at the papers. Like many of his kind, he rather fancied himself at the dispatch box. He would be fast on his feet, even though he only had two.

In the space where once he sported a fine mandible, the unwholesome slab of dense tissue stirred and his first human word rolled out.

“Righto.”

Advertisement

“I’ll have your coffee ready downstairs.”

He had often sipped coffee in the dead of night on the tea room floor. It tended to keep him awake in the day, but he enjoyed the taste and preferred it milky, with four sugars. He assumed this was generally known by his staff.

As soon as the aide had left the room, he pushed away the covers and managed at last to swing his tuberous legs on to the carpet. He stood at last at a vertiginous height, swaying slightly, with his soft, pale hands pressed to his forehead, and groaning again. Minutes later, making his unsteady way towards the bathroom, those same hands began nimbly to remove his pyjamas. He stepped out of them to stand on pleasantly heated tiles. It rather amused him, passing water thunderously into a specially prepared ceramic bowl, and his spirits lifted. But when he turned to confront the mirror over the handbasin, they sank again. The bristling oval disk of a face, wobbling on a thick pink stalk of neck, repelled him. The pinprick eyes shocked him. The inflated rim of darker flesh that framed an array of off-white teeth disgusted him. But I’m here for a proud cause and I’ll put up with anything, he reassured himself as he watched his hands turn the taps and reach for his shaving brush and soap


